Method call reference: major rewrite (#1725)
rust-lang/reference: src/expressions/method-call-expr.md

When looking up a method call, the receiver may be automatically dereferenced or borrowed in order to call a method.
This requires a more complex lookup process than for other functions, since there may be a number of possible methods to call.

The following procedure is used:

## Determining candidate types

First, a list of "candidate types" is assembled.

These types are found by taking the receiver type and iterating, following either:

* The built-in [dereference]; or
* `<T as Receiver>::Target`

to the next type. (If a step involved following the `Receiver` target, we also

> note whether it would have been reachable by following `<T as Deref::Target>`
> - this information is used later).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
note whether it would have been reachable by following `<T as
Deref::Target>` - this information is used later).
```

Github renders this as a bullet

Reviewer 2: We'll want to unwrap all these lines before merging anyway.

might be called. The list will be used in two different ways:

* To find types that might have methods. This is used in the
  "determining candidate methods" step, described below. This considers
  the full list.
* To find types to which the receiver can be converted. This is used in the
  "picking a method from the candidates" step, also described below - in this
  case, we only consider the types reachable via `Deref` or built-in
  dereferencing.

There is a built-in implementation of `Receiver` for all `T: Deref`, so
most of the time, every step can be reached through either mechanism.
Sometimes, more types can be reached via the `Receiver` chain, and so
more types will be considered for the former usage than the latter usage.

For instance, if the receiver has type `Box<[i32;2]>`, then the candidate types
will be `Box<[i32;2]>`,`[i32; 2]` (by dereferencing), and `[i32]` (by unsized
coercion).

If `SmartPtr<T>: Receiver<Target=T>`, and the receiver type is `&SmartPtr<Foo>`,
then the candidate types would be `&SmartPtr<Foo>`, `SmartPtr<Foo>` and `Foo`.

## Determining candidate methods

This list of candidate types is then converted to a list of candidate methods.

> For each step, the `self` type is used to determine what searches to perform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each step, the candidate type is used to determine what searches to perform:
```

?

> * For a trait object, there is first a search for for inherent candidates for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For a trait object, there is first a search for inherent candidates for
```

>   the object, then inherent impl candidates for the type.

Reviewer: Should one of these say "trait"? I'm a little confused what is meant by "object" vs "type". I know one of them is the `dyn Trait` type, but not sure which it is.

Author: Fair, I'll try to figure it out myself and amend this!

Author: I figured it out and answered in 4f2125b.

* For a struct, enum, or foreign type, there is a search for inherent
  impl candidates for the type.

> * For a type param, there's a search for for inherent candidates on the param.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For a type param, there's a search for inherent candidates on the param.
```

Reviewer: Also, I'm unclear on what this means. There's no such thing as an inherent method on a type parameter. All I can think of is if there are `T: Trait` bounds on the type parameter, we treat any trait named in the bounds as inherent.

Reviewer 2: Probably this is in reference to [these lines](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/9e48dfe5e0d5ec1b064b5d25504948ede0ec9b53/compiler/rustc_hir_typeck/src/method/probe.rs#L804-L806).

Reviewer 2: As a bit of archaeology, it looks like @nikomatsakis added this in commit rust-lang/rust@8a8f200d102294cf1bd90cdacad995abccda7934 in 2012.

Reviewer 2: This relates to the comment in https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/pull/1725/files#r1936405008.

The code uses "inherent" and "extension" candidates as terms of art.

* For other tyings (e.g. bools, chars) there's a search for inherent candidates

>   for the incoherent type.

Author: "tyings" was a typo.
I don't know what "incoherent" means here - I was rather hoping that this was obvious to all possible readers except me :) Sadly not, I'll look it up and expand this bit!

>   for the incoherent type.

Author: OK I had a crack at this in f1a7dd7. Please take a look!

* After any of these, there's a further search for extension candidates for

>   traits in scope.

Reviewer 3: Nit: The use of "extension" here and in the next section is a bit underspecified. Not sure how to resolve it, maybe "trait method"? Or "non-inherent"?

Author: Thanks - I'll fix

These searches contribute to list of all the candidate methods found;
separate lists are maintained for inherent and extension candidates. Only
[visible] candidates are included.

(For diagnostic purposes, the search may be performed slightly differently, for
instance searching all traits not just those in scope, or also noting
inaccessible candidates.)

## Picking a method from the candidates

Once the list of candidate methods is assembled, the "picking" process
starts.

Once again, the candidate types are iterated. This time, only those types

> are iterated which can be reached via the `Deref` trait or built-in derefs;

Reviewer 3: Nit: Does it make sense to differentiate between the `Deref` trait and built-in derefs here? What is the difference / why don't we just say `Deref`?

(Also relevant for "only consider the types reachable via `Deref` or built-in dereferencing" above).

Reviewer 2: Being explicit is correct.

Reviewer 3: > I think it's better to be very explicit here, since in one case we walk the chain of `Receiver` trait, plus built-in deref, and in the other case we walk the chain of `Deref` trait plus built-in deref.
> 
> (Built-in deref means the way Rust intrinsically knows how to deref `&T` without `&T: Deref`.)

Hmm, but [such a blanket implementation exists](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.84.1/std/ops/trait.Deref.html#impl-Deref-for-%26T)? Sure, that implementation may be fake, but [so is the `Add` trait implementation on integers](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.84.1/src/core/ops/arith.rs.html#103).

My point is, it's not clear to me that "built-in deref" isn't just an artifact of the current `rustc` implementation? Or is it an intrinsic, observable (outside of edge cases) property of the language that I just don't understand?

as noted above, this may be a shorter list than those that can be reached
using the `Receiver` trait.

For each step, picking is attempted in this order:

* First, a by-value method, where the `self` type precisely matches
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* Then, a method where `self` is received by immutable reference (`&T`)
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* Then, a method where `self` is received by mutable reference (`&mut T`)
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* Then, a method where the `self` type is a `*const T` - this is only considered

>   if the self type is `*mut T`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if the self type is `*mut T`
```

  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* And finally, a method with a `Pin` that's reborrowed, if the `pin_ergonomics`
  feature is enabled.
  * First for inherent methods

>   * Then for extension methods

Reviewer 2: We don't generally document unstable features, but this is the kind of case that makes me pretty sad about taking it out, as the comprehensiveness here is nice.  Wish we had a way to conditionalize this somehow.

cc @nikomatsakis as an example for us to think about.

For each of those searches, if exactly one candidate is identified,
it's picked, and the search stops. If this results in multiple possible candidates,

> then it is an error, and the receiver must be [converted][disambiguate call]
> to an appropriate receiver type to make the method call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then it is an error, and the user must [disambiguate][disambiguate call]
the call.
```

This is about clarifying that it's the user and not the compiler that must do something here.

Regarding the bit about conversion, it seems better to leave that off as it's not really about converting the receiver (i.e. the expression), it's about ascribing the receiver type in the syntax.

With the example above of `SmartPtr<T>: Receiver<Target=T>`, and the receiver
type `&SmartPtr<Foo>`, this mechanism would pick:

```rust,ignore
impl Foo {
   fn method(self: &SmartPtr<Foo>) {}
}
```

but would not pick

```rust,ignore
impl Foo {
   fn method(self: &Foo) {}
}
```

because the receiver could not be converted to `&Foo` using the `Deref` chain,
only the `Receiver` chain.

## Extra details

There are a few details not considered in this overview:

* The search for candidate methods will also consider searches for
  incoherent types if `rustc_has_incoherent_inherent_impls` is active for

>   a `dyn`, struct, enum, or foreign type.

Reviewer 2: Is there any way for stable Rust code to be affected by this, e.g. by how this is applied to the `Error` trait or the `CStr` type?

Author: Good question, this is another thing I'll need to go and figure out

Author: I don't think so. To use this, the unstable feature `rustc_attrs` is [necessary](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=c5f9f1ae7243f032702e3a081a6913ce). Added e17b9b6e993373ad54ce74c98b754242c80b1e6c to show that this requires an unstable feature (pending the conversation above about whether such things should be documented at all).

* If there are multiple candidates from traits, they may in fact be
  identical, and the picking operation collapses them to a single pick to avoid
  reporting conflicts.
* Extra searches are performed to spot "shadowing" of pointee methods
  by smart pointer methods, during the picking process. If a by-value pick
  is going to be returned, an extra search is performed for a `&T` or
  `&mut T` method. Similarly, if a `&T` method is to be returned, an extra
  search is performed for `&mut T` methods. These extra searches consider
  only inherent methods, where `T` is identical, but the method is
  found from a step further along the `Receiver` chain. If any such method
  is found, an ambiguity error is emitted.
* An error is emitted if we reached a recursion limit.
* The picking process emits some adjustments which must be made to the
  receiver type in order to get to the correct `self` type. This includes
  a number of dereferences, a possible autoreferencing, a conversion from
  a mutable pointer to a constant pointer, or a pin reborrow.
* Extra lists are maintained for diagnostic purposes:

>   unstable candidates, unsatisfied predicates, and static candidates.

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: Maybe leave notes about diagnostics out of the overview if saying under "extra details" that they're left out?

Author: Done, at least if I understand you correctly - I've moved the remaining diagnostic-related point down to the Extra Details list.

Sometimes, more types can be reached via the `Receiver` chain, and so
more types will be considered for the former usage than the latter usage.

For instance, if the receiver has type `Box<[i32;2]>`, then the candidate types
will be `Box<[i32;2]>`,`[i32; 2]` (by dereferencing), and `[i32]` (by unsized
coercion).

If `SmartPtr<T>: Receiver<Target=T>`, and the receiver type is `&SmartPtr<Foo>`,
then the candidate types would be `&SmartPtr<Foo>`, `SmartPtr<Foo>` and `Foo`.

## Determining candidate methods

This list of candidate types is then converted to a list of candidate methods.
For each step, the candidate type is used to determine what searches to perform:

* For a trait object, there is first a search for inherent candidates for
  the object, then inherent impl candidates for the type.
* For a struct, enum, or foreign type, there is a search for inherent
  impl candidates for the type.
* For a type param, there's a search for inherent candidates on the param.
* For various simpler types (listed below) there's a search for inherent
  candidates for the incoherent type.
* After any of these, there's a further search for extension candidates for

>   traits in scope.

Reviewer 4: As I understand it, the "further search for extension candidates for traits in scope." happens once, not once for each candidate type, so I suggest putting this after the bulleted list rather than as part of it.

Perhaps mention the special case described in https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/issues/630#issuecomment-1229568011 here?

Author: > the "further search for extension candidates for traits in scope." happens once, not once for each candidate type

Yep, it was my intent to say that, thanks for spotting it wasn't clear, I moved it.

> Perhaps mention the special case

Reading the code, I don't think this is a special case. I think that these are regarded as inherent methods. I think this relates to someone else's comment that the meaning of "inherent" and "extension" is unclear - I'll address that separately.

Reviewer 4: I tried an [experiment](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=5c3a53532416abac6b15e6f7ccd0e769) for the "a trait is considered for method resolution inside an impl of that trait" rule.

I think that's telling us that the methods which become visible via that rule are treated as extension methods.

Reviewer 4: As far as I can tell the rule is simply that when we're inside a trait impl the trait the impl's for is "in scope" in the same way as a trait that's visible by being defined or `use`d in the current module would be.

I think this is being done by [`traits_in_scope()`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/9cd60bd2ccc41bc898d2ad86728f14035d2df72d/compiler/rustc_resolve/src/lib.rs#L1755C1-L1761C1) in the name resolution code.

When looking up a method call, the receiver may be automatically dereferenced or borrowed in order to call a method.
This requires a more complex lookup process than for other functions, since there may be a number of possible methods to call.

The following procedure is used:

## Determining candidate types

First, a list of "candidate types" is assembled.

These types are found by taking the receiver type and iterating, following either:

* The built-in [dereference]; or
* `<T as Receiver>::Target`

to the next type. (If a step involved following the `Receiver` target, we also
note whether it would have been reachable by following `<T as
Deref::Target>` - this information is used later).

At the end, an additional candidate step may be added for

> an [unsized coercion].

Reviewer 2: Can this only appear at the end of the `Deref` chain, or is there any way to witness that it has appeared at the end of the `Receiver` chain?

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth also trying to explain somewhere why this doesn't work (or maybe it actually should):

```rust
trait Tr {
    fn f(&self) {}
}
impl Tr for W<[()]> {}

#[repr(transparent)]
struct W<T: ?Sized>(T);

fn main() {
    let x: &W<[(); 0]> = &W([(); 0]);
    //let x: &W<[()]> = x;
    _ = x.f(); //~ ERROR
    //
    // The chain of candidate types should be:
    //
    //     &W<[(); 0]>
    //     &&W<[(); 0]> (by autoref)
    //     &mut &W<[(); 0]> (by autoref)
    //     W<[(); 0]> (by deref)
    //     &W<[(); 0]> (by autoref)
    //     W<[(); 0]> (by autoref)
    //     ----------------------------- These don't happen.
    //     W<[()]> (by unsized coercion)
    //     &W<[()]> (by autoref)
    //     &mut W<[()]> (by autoref)
}
```

Author: I've clarified that this unsized coercion only applies if the final type is itself an array (as opposed to containing an array etc. per your example) in 923094b. I can see the argument that it could apply to "inner" types such as you suggest above, but I don't think we should consider a change like that right now.

Your point about whether this should be applicable to `Deref`/`Receiver` is a good one. I'm researching.

Author: Thanks for the great question about whether the unsize coercion should apply at the end of the `Deref` or `Receiver` chain.

There are in fact _two_ things done at the end of the chain, and in the current code, both are applied at the end of the `Deref` chain rather than at the end of the (potentially longer) `Receiver` chain.

* The unsized coercion you're talking about
* Checking for bad types.

Checking for bad types needs to be done at the end of the `Deref` chain because otherwise irrelevant errors deeper in the `Receiver` chain can cause problems calling legitimate methods. See the test cases `call_method_unknown_referent.rs` and `call_method_unknown_referent2.rs` which test the behavior here and have some comments.

Because this "bad types" check applied at the end of the `Deref` chain, by default, I kept the unsized coercion applying to the end of that chain too. Until you asked, I hadn't considered the possibility that we could apply the "bad types" check at the end of the `Deref` chain and the unsized coercion at the end of the `Receiver` chain.

I've now played with this a bit and I think that, in fact, it would have no effect.

The sort of test case we're considering is this:

```rust
struct SmartPtr<T: ?Sized>(T);

impl<T: ?Sized> core::ops::Receiver for SmartPtr<T> {
    type Target = T;
}

trait T {
    fn m(self: &SmartPtr<Self>);
}

// If we want this block to be searched for methods, we have to apply the unsized coercion at the
// end of the `Receiver` chain, rather than the end of the `Deref` chain.
impl T for [u8] { 
    // But even if we do that, this method can't be called because the lack of Deref
    // prevents &SmartPtr<[u8;3]> being converted to SmartPtr<[u8]> when it comes to confirm
    // the method call.
    fn m(self: &SmartPtr<Self>) {}
}

fn main() {
    let s = SmartPtr([0u8, 1u8, 2u8]);
    let s = &s;
    s.m();
}
```

However, I can't get any permutation like this to actually work. In the above example, the method isn't found. Even though we search the `impl T for [u8]` block for methods, we can't actually confirm any method pick because the lack of `Deref` implementation means that `SmartPtr<[u8;3]>` can't be converted to `SmartPtr<[u8]>` when the time comes to confirm the method.

So, I'm not 100% sure, but I think this means that there's no user-visible impact by changing the unsized coercion to apply at the end of the `Receiver` chain instead of the `Deref` chain. It would result in slightly different diagnostics
 in the above call.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for investigating that.  This makes sense and concurs with what I had suspected from my own analysis.

There might be something interesting to consider here for the future, though.  If we did later allow unsized coercions of more than just arrays in building the chain, then this would mean that one elaborated chain would no longer be a prefix of the other one.  Not sure if that would create any problems.

E.g., if we were willing to add an unsized coercion from `W<[u8; 1]>` to `W<[u8]>`, and there was also an `impl<T> Receiver for W<T>`, the `Deref`-derived chain would end in `W<[u8; 1]>, W<[u8]>` and the `Receiver`-derive one would end in `W<[u8; 1]>, [u8; 1]`.

Author: Yes - one of the great simplifying assumptions in all of this is that one chain is strictly shorter than the other, so if we do expand unsized coercions we will want to tread carefully there.

I hope you agree that's something for the future so I'm going to mark this comment thread as resolved.

Sometimes, more types can be reached via the `Receiver` chain, and so
more types will be considered for the former usage than the latter usage.

For instance, if the receiver has type `Box<[i32;2]>`, then the candidate types
will be `Box<[i32;2]>`,`[i32; 2]` (by dereferencing), and `[i32]` (by unsized
coercion).

If `SmartPtr<T>: Receiver<Target=T>`, and the receiver type is `&SmartPtr<Foo>`,
then the candidate types would be `&SmartPtr<Foo>`, `SmartPtr<Foo>` and `Foo`.

## Determining candidate methods

This list of candidate types is then converted to a list of candidate methods.
For each step, the candidate type is used to determine what searches to perform:

* For a struct, enum, foreign type, or various simpler types (listed below)
  there is a search for inherent impl candidates for the type.
* For a type param, there's a search for inherent candidates on the param.
* For a trait object, there is first a search for inherent candidates for
  the trait (for example in `impl Trait` blocks), then inherent impl
  candidates for the trait object itself (for example found in `impl dyn Trait`
  blocks).

After these occur, there's a further search for extension candidates for

> traits in scope.

Reviewer 2: It'd be good to extend this with discussion of how and where we search, which is rather elided here.  The Reference text we're removing had something about this:

> Then, for each candidate type `T`, search for a visible method with a receiver of that type in the following places:...

That is, here, we want to say (I think) that we're searching all inherent impls on each candidate type and all visible trait impls on each candidate type (with traits specified as bounds adding to the "inherent candidates" and traits in scope adding to the "extension candidates") for methods with a `self` type that matches one of the "types to which a receiver can be converted" (from above).

Also, the description of assembling the candidate types above does not talk about the types added by autoref (`&T` and `&mut T`) -- this is covered below as part of the picking process.  But don't we need to do this ahead of or during the search process for method candidates?

Reviewer 4: The other thing to say is that we only consider methods whose name matches the method name we're looking for (ie, the _PathExprSegment_ from the _MethodCallExpression_).

Author: At this point, we're just assembling candidates. As far as I can see, we don't consider the `self` type at all. We're using the list of candidate types thus far just to find `impl` blocks to search for methods.

The bit in the previous version about "with a receiver of that type" was because it claimed that the whole "assemble candidate list" then "pick one" was a single process. I've separated that out. We don't consider the `self` type in assembling the candidate list.

Regarding autoref: for inherent methods this makes no sense because you can't:

```rust
impl &A {
  // ...
}
```
and again, at this point, we're only using the candidate types to consider where to search for methods, not whether the actual `self` type matches.

For extension candidates, [we can indeed implement them for `&A`](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=de7faa3922920ab4e761795df1aefe33). But, for extension candidates, at this stage we don't think about the `self` type at all - we just list matching method names from _all_ traits in scope. I tried to clarify this in 9d00834.

I added a note about method names in 41098a641e31e3f7b0a4d5838723f9434c65fb99.

Reviewer 2: Got it.  Thanks.

"Various simpler types" currently means bool, char, all numbers, str, array,
slices, raw pointers, references, never and tuple.

["Inherent"][inherent] means a candidate method from a block directly
corresponding to the type in the signature. For example, the `impl` blocks
corresponding to a struct or a trait. "Extension" means a candidate gathered

> by considering [methods on traits] in scope.

Author: These are indeed interesting and quite surprising.

If it helps, [this is the code which is presumably having this effect](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/03eb45452305f2d52348279d0caa5fc1f12c438d/compiler/rustc_hir_typeck/src/method/probe.rs#L1831) - I'm afraid most of the stuff around relating, normalizing, and transforming types is beyond me, but perhaps it helps you figure out what's up.

Might I propose that I don't alter this PR to account for this complexity, and that as our understanding here is currently low and hopefully will increase, it might be appopriate for a follow-up change?

> by considering [methods on traits] in scope.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I referenced `probe.rs` in crafting the examples.  I think it's pretty clear at this point what it's doing.  We just need to tweak the wording a bit to capture it.  Methods from inherent impls are always inherent candidates.  For `dyn Trait` types, this includes the inherent impls on the `dyn Trait` and the "built-in impl" for vtable dispatch.  If the receiver type unifies with a generic parameter, and there's a trait bound on that type, then the methods from that trait are inherent candidates.

Methods from in-scope traits are extension candidates, including when the trait is in scope due to being the trait being implemented.

> by considering [methods on traits] in scope.

Author: OK. I'd like to take your wording as-is but first I need to work out whether the call to `self.n()` [here](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=6830f06a32782a54f970cb1e91445015) is inherent or extension. If it's inherent (I think so) then it's a sufficiently common case we should probably explicitly mention it, even though I suspect that behind the scenes it's handled by "if the receiver type unifies with a generic parameter".

> by considering [methods on traits] in scope.

Reviewer 2: Good example.  Yes, it's inherent.  The proof is this:

```rust
#[allow(unused)]
trait Tr {
    fn g(&self) -> u8 { 2 }
}
impl<T: ?Sized> Tr for T {}

trait A {
    fn f(&self) -> u8 {
        self.g()
    }
    fn g(&self) -> u8 { 1 }
}
impl A for () {}

fn main() {
    assert_eq!(().f(), 1);
}
```

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+This+demonstrates+another+interesting+case+of+what+an+inherent%0A%2F%2F+method+candidate+is.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-08%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Freference%2Fpull%2F1725%23discussion_r1957787627%0A%0A%23%5Ballow%28unused%29%5D%0Atrait+Tr+%7B%0A++++fn+g%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+2+%7D%0A%7D%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+%3FSized%3E+Tr+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Atrait+A+%7B%0A++++fn+f%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B%0A++++++++self.g%28%29%0A++++%7D%0A++++fn+g%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+1+%7D%0A%7D%0Aimpl+A+for+%28%29+%7B%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%0A++++assert_eq%21%28%28%29.f%28%29%2C+1%29%3B%0A%7D%0A)

Here's that example desugared with specialization:

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+This+demonstrates+another+interesting+case+of+what+an+inherent%0A%2F%2F+method+candidate+is%2C+desugaring+the+default+method+bodies+in+the%0A%2F%2F+example+with+specialization.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Author%3A+TC%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-08%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Freference%2Fpull%2F1725%23discussion_r1957787627%0A%0A%23%21%5Bfeature%28specialization%29%5D%0A%23%21%5Ballow%28incomplete_features%29%5D%0A%0A%23%5Ballow%28unused%29%5D%0Atrait+Tr+%7B%0A++++fn+g%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+2+%7D%0A%7D%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+%3FSized%3E+Tr+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Atrait+A+%7B%0A++++fn+f%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8%3B%0A++++fn+g%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Adefault+impl%3CT%3E+A+for+T+%7B%0A++++fn+f%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B%0A++++++++self.g%28%29%0A++++%7D%0A++++fn+g%28%26self%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+1+%7D%0A%7D%0A%0Aimpl+A+for+%28%29+%7B%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%0A++++assert_eq%21%28%28%29.f%28%29%2C+1%29%3B%0A%7D%0A)

It is probably worth mentioning this one too.

These searches contribute to list of all the candidate methods found;
separate lists are maintained for the inherent and extension candidates.
Only [visible] candidates are included.

## Picking a method from the candidates

Once the list of candidate methods is assembled, the "picking" process
starts.

Once again, the candidate types are iterated. This time, only those types
are iterated which can be reached via the `Deref` trait or built-in derefs;
as noted above, this may be a shorter list than those that can be reached
using the `Receiver` trait.

For each step, picking is attempted in this order:

* First, a by-value method, where the `self` type precisely matches
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* Then, a method where `self` is received by immutable reference (`&T`)
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods
* Then, a method where `self` is received by mutable reference (`&mut T`)
  * First for inherent methods
  * Then for extension methods

> * Then, a method where the `self` type is a `*const T` - this is only considered

Author: Here's a [playground which I think demonstrates this](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=706abdc89490d8d79183a0ec6f4aa630), without `arbitrary_self_types`.

When looking up a method call, the receiver may be automatically dereferenced or borrowed in order to call a method.
This requires a more complex lookup process than for other functions, since there may be a number of possible methods to call.

The following procedure is used:

## Determining candidate types

First, a list of "candidate types" is assembled.

These types are found by taking the receiver type and iterating, following either:

* The built-in [dereference]; or
* `<T as Receiver>::Target`

to the next type. (If a step involved following the `Receiver` target, we also
note whether it would have been reachable by following `<T as

> Deref::Target>` - this information is used later).

Reviewer 5: typo
```suggestion
Deref>::Target` - this information is used later).
```

* To find types to which the receiver can be converted. This is used in the
  "picking a method from the candidates" step, also described below - in this
  case, we only consider the types reachable via `Deref` or built-in
  dereferencing.

There is a built-in implementation of `Receiver` for all `T: Deref`, so
most of the time, every step can be reached through either mechanism.
Sometimes, more types can be reached via the `Receiver` chain, and so
more types will be considered for the former usage than the latter usage.

For instance, if the receiver has type `Box<[i32;2]>`, then the candidate types
will be `Box<[i32;2]>`,`[i32; 2]` (by dereferencing), and `[i32]` (by unsized
coercion).

If `SmartPtr<T>: Receiver<Target=T>`, and the receiver type is `&SmartPtr<Foo>`,
then the candidate types would be `&SmartPtr<Foo>`, `SmartPtr<Foo>` and `Foo`.

## Determining candidate methods

This list of candidate types is then converted to a list of candidate methods.
For each step, the candidate type is used to determine what searches to perform:

* For a struct, enum, foreign type, or various simpler types (listed below)
  there is a search for inherent impl candidates for the type.

> * For a type param, there's a search for inherent candidates on the param.

Reviewer 6: this is currently confusing to me, it's also confusing in the source :3

what's happening here is:
- `assemble_inherent_candidates` for params looks for where-bounds with that param as the self type. Giving us a list of traits methods
- all of these trait methods should also be found by `assemble_extension_candidates_for_all_traits`

However, we manually look for methods from `T: Trait` bounds to give them precedence over methods from other traits: 
```rust
trait Trait {
    fn method(&self) {}
}
impl<T> Trait for T {}
trait OtherTrait {
    fn method(&self) {}
}
impl<T> OtherTrait for T {}

struct Wrapper<T>(T);
fn foo<T>(x: T, y: Wrapper<T>)
where
    T: Trait,
    Wrapper<T>: Trait,
{
    x.method(); // ok
    y.method(); // error
}
```
The same in the "trait object" section.

I personally would prefer to only talk about 'inherent' and 'trait' candidates and then mention at the end that some trait candidates are given the same precedence as inherent ones. But that feels like a fairly big change (and diverges from the current terminology used in rustc)

there's already a convo with @traviscross about this, i think it's fine and idk how to meaningfully change this to be clearer for me :thinking:

* For a trait object, there is first a search for inherent candidates for
  the trait (for example in `impl Trait` blocks), then inherent impl
  candidates for the trait object itself (for example found in `impl dyn Trait`
  blocks).

After these occur, there's a further search for extension candidates from
all traits in scope (irrespective of whether the trait is remotely relevant

> to the `self` type - that's considered later).

Reviewer 2: Probably this parenthetical could use some wording iteration.  What I would expect this to mean is "irrespective of whether the trait impl method being considered for selection as a method candidate has a `self` type that's relevant to the receiver type", but not to mean that we're considering methods from traits that aren't relevant to the receiver type due to, e.g., not having any impls for types in the list of candidate types.  Is that right?

Author: At this point in the search, we consider _literally any trait_. Limiting to applicable self types comes later in the process.

Reviewer 2: Wild.  You're saying this all gets sorted out during the picking process then.  I suppose that makes sense given that autoref is being handle there also.  OK.

"Various simpler types" currently means bool, char, all numbers, str, array,
slices, raw pointers, references, never and tuple.

["Inherent"][inherent] means a candidate method from a block directly
corresponding to the type in the signature. For example, the `impl` blocks
corresponding to a struct or a trait. "Extension" means a candidate gathered
by considering [methods on traits] in scope.

Each of these searches looks for [visible] candidates where the method name
matches.

These searches contribute to list of all the candidate methods found;
separate lists are maintained for the inherent and extension candidates.

## Picking a method from the candidates

Once the list of candidate methods is assembled, the "picking" process
starts.

Once again, the candidate types are iterated. This time, only those types

> are iterated which can be reached via the `Deref` trait or built-in derefs;

Reviewer 2: OK, here's a question.  Above, we create a list of candidate types.  We then looks for candidate methods in the last step.  But notably, we collect candidate methods from extension candidates without regard to the candidate types:

> After these occur, there's a further search for extension candidates from all traits in scope (irrespective of whether the trait is remotely relevant to the `self` type - that's considered later).

Then we get to here, in the picking process.  But this next now says that we're only considering those candidate types that can be reached via the `Deref` chain.

So as written, this would seem to imply that the `Receiver` chain extending beyond the `Deref` chain isn't considered at all with regard to selecting or picking methods from in scope traits, but that doesn't seem right.

What's the right answer here?

Author: It's a perspective I hadn't thought of before: the `Receiver` trait makes no difference to method *resolution* for extension methods. I think that's the logically correct conclusion.

However, the `Receiver` trait is considered also in `wfcheck.rs` which rejects [examples like this](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=e58bb3a60785e680aa8f9e0bf6734cfe) if you remove the `impl Receiver` before we even get as far as resolving any methods.

Reviewer 2: Wild.  OK, now this is snapping into focus.

Reviewer 2: OK, that then gives us something to explain in the text.  We say:

> For each of those searches, if exactly one candidate is identified, it's picked, and the search stops. If this results in multiple possible candidates, then it is an error...

There must, I'm guessing, be some interaction with the well-formedness checking at this point.  I.e., maybe it's that if exactly one candidate is identified that is well-formed (where the well-formedness checking considers the `Receiver` chain), then it is picked.  Because we don't report ambiguity errors just because two in-scope traits have a method of the same name that could apply.  I'm thinking of examples like this:

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+In+method+resolution%2C+when+we+collect+extension+candidate+methods%2C%0A%2F%2F+we+do+not+consider+the+set+of+candidate+types+at+all.++That+is%2C+we%0A%2F%2F+collect+the+candidate+methods+from+the+in+scope+traits+purely+by%0A%2F%2F+looking+for+methods+with+a+matching+name+and+without+any+regard+for%0A%2F%2F+for+the+receiver+type+or+anything+derived+from+it.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Then%2C+during+the+picking+process%2C+we+iterate+across+the+set+of%0A%2F%2F+candidate+types+reachable+through+the+%60Deref%60+chain+only.++That+is%2C%0A%2F%2F+we+don%27t+consider+the+%60Receiver%60+chain+at+this+point.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+All+together%2C+that+means+we+never+consider+the+%60Receiver%60+chain+%28as%0A%2F%2F+it+might+extend+past+the+%60Deref%60%29+chain+when+either+collecting+or%0A%2F%2F+picking+candidate+methods+for+in+scope+traits.++That+is%2C+we+don%27t%0A%2F%2F+consider+it+during+method+resolution+for+extension+candidates.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+However%2C+there%27s+separate+logic+in+well-formedness+checking%2C+in%0A%2F%2F+%60wfcheck.rs%60%2C+that+considers+the+%60Receiver%60+chain+when+chosing%0A%2F%2F+results+to+reject.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+What+we+demonstrate+in+this+example+is+that+there+must+be+some%0A%2F%2F+interplay+between+that+and+the+picking+process+to+avoid+the%0A%2F%2F+ambiguity+error.++That+is%2C+both+%60%3C%28%29+as+A%3E%3A%3Af%60+and+%60%3C%28%29+as+B%3E%3A%3Af%60%0A%2F%2F+are+going+to+be+collected+as+extension+candidates.++Then%2C+during%0A%2F%2F+picking%2C+when+searching+the+extension+candidates+for+the+%60%28%29%60%0A%2F%2F+candidate+type%2C+we%27ll+find+both+of+these+methods.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+According+to+our+stated+rules%2C+that+should+produce+an+ambiguity%0A%2F%2F+error%2C+but+it+doesn%27t.++So+we+must+be+doing+something%2C%0A%2F%2F+e.g.+excluding+those+candidates+that+are+not+well+formed+maybe%2C%0A%2F%2F+before+reporting+an+ambiguity+error+in+picking.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Freference%2Fpull%2F1725%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Author%3A+TC%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-09%0A%0A%23%21%5Bfeature%28arbitrary_self_types%29%5D%0A%0Ause+core%3A%3Aops%3A%3AReceiver%3B%0A%0Apub+struct+W%3CT%3A+%3FSized%3E%28T%29%3B%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+%3FSized%3E+Receiver+for+W%3CT%3E+%7B%0A++++type+Target+%3D+T%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Apub+trait+NoImpl+%7B%7D%0A%0Apub+trait+A%3A+Sized+%7B%0A++++fn+f%28self%3A+W%3CSelf%3E%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+2+%7D%0A%7D%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+NoImpl%3E+A+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Apub+trait+B%3A+Sized+%7B%0A++++fn+f%28self%3A+W%3CSelf%3E%29+-%3E+u8+%7B+1+%7D%0A%7D%0Aimpl%3CT%3E+B+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%0A++++assert_eq%21%281%2C+W%28%28%29%29.f%28%29%29%3B%0A%7D%0A)

* For a struct, enum, or foreign type, there is a search for inherent
  impl candidates for the type.
* For a type param, there's a search for for inherent candidates on the param.
* For various simpler types (listed below) there's a search for inherent
  candidates for the incoherent type.
* After any of these, there's a further search for extension candidates for
  traits in scope.

"Various simpler types" currently means bool, char, all numbers, str, array,
slices, raw pointers, references, never and tuple.

These searches contribute to list of all the candidate methods found;
separate lists are maintained for inherent and extension candidates
(that is, applicable candidates from traits). Only [visible] candidates

> are included.

Reviewer 2: You're of course the expert here, but is this parenthetical, and are the parentheticals added below, correct?

To me, it seems that what `probe.rs` considers to be an "inherent candidate" is (something in the vicinity of) one that can be deduced exclusively from the signature, including WCs, whereas an "extension candidate" is one that considers the traits in scope.  So, e.g., in...

```rust
impl<F: FnPtr> hash::Hash for F {
    fn hash<HH: hash::Hasher>(&self, state: &mut HH) {
        state.write_usize(self.addr() as _)
    }
}
```

(From `library/core/src/ptr/mod.rs`.)

...the `hash::Hasher::write_usize` method is an "inherent candidate" even though it is from a trait, and it is not an "extension candidate" because `Hasher` is not in scope.

This is, I surmise, what answers @tmandry's question in the other thread about what it means to find inherent candidates on type parameters.

Anyway, if you would, have a look and see what's correct here.  We should probably somewhere just clearly define what we mean by "inherent candidate" and "extension candidate" and lean into the model used by `probe.rs`.

Also cc @nikomatsakis who seems to have written much of this way back when.

Author: I agree, I've expanded this a bit. Take a look.

I still need to work on expanding this bullet per @tmandry 's comments:

> * For a trait object, there is first a search for inherent candidates for
  the object, then inherent impl candidates for the type. 

Unfortunately I can't figure out exactly what's going on here, so I'm going to have to disable bits of the code and find out what breaks... :)
